---
title: "Stubborn Optimism"
date: 2026-06-16
summary: "Thoughts on the themes of hope in recent films"
category: personal
---

Art imitates life or life imitates art? This has been a pertinent question posed at most artistic junctions. As the world collapses into the most progressive and destructive version of itself, I find myself looking to the art we are producing in the hopes of identifying a guide line. Which brings me to the recent art I have consumed. Let's begin with the movies. This year has seen the rise in stubbornly optimistic themes in movies. From the anti-AI messaging in *The Devil Wears Prada 2*, to the innate curiosity and hope in *Project Hail Mary*, and the question posed to humanity in *Disclosure Day*, I left all three movies with a sense of direction.

With the nature of this optimism, I want to emphasize the adverb that describes it. Stubbornly optimistic. All three films have been commercial and to an extent, a critical success. The brand of hope being projected is not delusional. This isn't art that shows good and evil. This isn't art that brands a villain, painted in black fallen to his knees at the righteous sword of the hero in white. In retrospect, there aren't any villains in these movies. There are antagonists. As a literary term, an antagonist in the story has motivations that contradict or hinder the protagonist. Heroes and villains on the other hand are defined in some moral capacity. In *The Devil Wears Prada 2* the antagonist isn't a cruel and impossible-to-please fashion editor, but an industry. An industry that is prioritizing optimization over expression and encroaching artistic freedom with ad revenue. Here the protagonists battle for the soul of the profession and the heart of the people working in it. The antagonist in *Project Hail Mary* is a dying star and a form of life that feeds on the stars. It is the improbability of success and the certainty of Ryland never returning home. Faced with these tribulations, how does he go forth and still complete his task? In *Disclosure Day*, the antagonist is the WARDEX preserving the current world order. It is the lack of faith in humanity and the fear of anarchy in the world. The protagonists fight to place their trust in people, in allowing humanity to decide for itself, and in the hope that we don't tear each other apart.

None of these antagonists wear black. None of them bow down to the hero or are struck down in the end. In most cases, that is quite literally impossible. These films show you a world where the battle is uphill, the task is Sisyphean, and the probability of success is miniscule. The stubbornness in the optimism lies here. When faced with no villain, with no moral compulsion to hold yourself accountable, how do our protagonists succeed? Because success here isn't one moment of triumph, it is in constantly trying.

I love these movies because they force you to face the reality of life. All our lives, we don't get dramatic third acts. We don't necessarily write a great story of comeuppance and full circle moments. Like we don't know if Ryland ever makes it back to earth, or what the message spoken by the non-humans is, we also don't know if we really succeeded in our tasks. In likely succeeding in one task, we create newer problems. By lowering infant mortality, we have inadvertently added to the world's population. By having heaters that brave brutal winters, we add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. This is not to say that we will need to reduce the NICUs in the world, or shut off heating, but rather that we don't get a picture perfect solution to our problems. These films echo our reality back to us. They are not telling us a story, but repeating our own victories back to us. Victory here isn't triumph. It is constantly trying.

My favourite series is *The Newsroom*. For anyone who has watched this masterpiece of a show, you will know the uphill battle the characters face. They have taken up the mantle of adequately informing the American public of news that will create a well informed electorate, thereby strengthening democracy. This is a task that can never be completed. The filmmakers knew this, and I think everyone in the profession and the audience do as well. Why start a task that will never be complete and you can never succeed at? The show answers this in three seasons and summarizes it in one dialogue. As Will says to Mackenzie, "You are on a ship with a huge hole. You can never seal the hole, and you cannot leave the ship or abandon it. Your job is to bail water out faster than it is coming in."

That is stubborn optimism. It is bailing water out for as long as your knees have the strength. It is what inspires bravery in Ryland to go after Rocky's ship and obliterate his chances at going home. It is what pushes Kellner and Fairchild to disclose extraterrestrial life to humanity. If art imitates life, then these films and shows have been inspired by Moon missions, eradication of smallpox, growth in the population of endangered animals, rise in literacy rates, drop in infant mortality, and far, far more than I can write out in an essay.

For when life should imitate art, I hope we are inspired by these films to be brave, to do what is right, to trust in people, and to be kind. To stick with these virtues not as an opposition to the bad, but as though they are what we stand on. I hope that we live with this stubborn optimism and bail water out.
